------------------
Rygar NES Guide
Text Version 1.2
By Jay McGavren
Release 2001-04-06
------------------

Copyright 1997-2001 Jay McGavren. Permission is given to reproduce 
this document in any media as long as all text remains intact and no 
fees are charged for its distribution.

Questions, comments, and corrections should be directed to the 
author's E-mail address: jaymcgavren@home.com.

Version History:
1.0  - Initial release
1.01 - Extremely minor update regarding Wind Pulley use
1.1  - Added some interesting bugs/tricks (thanks to Frank Piringer!)
1.11 - Added Belzar bug
1.2  - Added Ligar tip (thanks to Y.B. Normal!)

----------
Your Stats
----------

Tone 
       A measure of your current strength. The higher this number,
       the more damage your attacks will do. This is built up by
       killing monsters. 
Last 
       Your current experience. Also built up by killing monsters.
       When it reaches 48 another unit will be added to your
       maximum HP, and another unit will be added each time this
       number doubles thereafter (i.e. at 96, 192, and so on). 
Mind 
       Built up by gathering the star icons enemies sometimes drop
       when killed. The single-star icon gives you 1 Mind unit, the
       double-star icon gives you 3 Mind units. Mind units are used to
       cast spells (see below). You can hold a maximum of 7 units. 

----------
The Spells
----------

Power Up 
       Increases the reach of your weapon until you are killed. Costs 3
       Mind units. 
Attack and Assail 
       For a short time all enemies on the screen will take damage each
       time you attack. Costs 5 Mind units. 
Recover 
       Completely refills your HP. Costs 7 Mind units. 

---------
The Items
---------

Grappling Hook 
       Once you have this item you can press Up and B at any time to
       launch a grappling hook straight into the air. If it strikes a
       ceiling (even one that's not visible on the screen) it will catch
       and hold, allowing you to climb up and hang from it. When
       standing on a ledge you can press down and B to descend. 
Wind Pulley 
       With this item you can cross chasms that are spanned by ropes. 
       In side-view mode simply walk off the ledge by one end of the 
       rope and the pulley will catch on. In overhead-view mode walk 
       around by one end of the rope; when you hear a "click" sound the 
       pulley is attached and you can cross.
Crossbow 
       Use this item to shoot a rope across chasms with posts on
       either side. You can then use the pulley to cross. Stand next to
       one of the poles and press B to fire the crossbow. 
Coat of Arms 
       Before you have this item some hermits will ask you if you
       have the Coat of Arms. Once you have it these same hermits
       will give you a potion to completely refill your HP at any time. 
Indora's Armor 
       Increases your defensive power.
Life Potion 
       Once you have this item simply highlight it in the submenu and
       press B to completely refill your HP at any time. It's only good
       for one use but you can get another at any time. 
Pegasus Flute 
       Once you have all the items, if you play this flute at the right 
       location, you'll be given access to the final stage. It can also 
       help during the final battle.

-------------
General Hints
-------------

Easy Experience 1
       In the first area you can back yourself up against a wall, duck,
       and start pounding away at the B button to get some easy Mind
       points and experience. If you have a turbofire controller you
       can let it do all the work for you while you go grab a snack. 
Power Up
       The Power Up spell only costs 3 Mind points and its effect is
       permanent (until you're killed), so cast it as soon as you have
       the necessary points. 
Attack and Assail
       Attack and Assail is pretty much a waste of your time. Save
       your Mind points for the Recover spell. 
Overhead View Jumping Attacks
       Partly thanks to sloppy programming, you can jump up in
       overhead view mode and hit enemies that are actually behind
       you, without any risk of being hurt yourself. 
When to Use the Grappling Hook
       Can't advance? Maybe there's a platform on the screen above
       or below you. Toss the grappling hook up to see if it catches
       anything or lower yourself down if you can. 
Maximizing HP
       Try to get to bosses with full Mind points and a healing potion
       if you can. Wait until your HP is low and then use the healing
       potion, and then wait for your HP to run low again before
       using the Recover spell. Budget your strength carefully and
       you can kill bosses you otherwise wouldn't be ready to face. 
Easy Experience 2
       One of the best places in the game to get experience quick is in
       the flying stone islands of Lapis, and you can get to it as soon
       as you have the grappling hook. Head as far right as you can
       and launch the grappling hook up to climb to the next screen.
       You'll be attacked by a lone robot. It'll take many hits to kill
       but it's worth lots of experience. Then enter the nearby door
       and when you exit the robot will be back. Kill it again and
       repeat the process and eventually you'll be strong enough to
       finish it (and anything else) in a single hit. 
Easy Experience 3
       Another excellent place to power up is the Tower of Garba,
       accessible once you have the crossbow. The snail near the
       center of the tower reappears each time you leave the screen and
       return. Go off the right side of the screen, come back in, and
       start pounding the B button (you may have to take a couple hits
       before it's dead if you're not strong enough). You can quickly
       build up enough strength to take the snail out in one hit, and
       then even the final boss will be easy. 

-----------
Walkthrough
-----------

Gran Mountain 
       Work your way to the right through the first area and into the
       passes of Gran Mountain. Explore the different doorways you
       find here, and eventually you'll find a passage to a valley in
       Garloz. 
Garloz 
       This is an overhead-view area. Head north, then west through
       the opening in the cliff. Then go due north and take the
       right-hand path. This will lead you to a hermit who will give
       you the Grappling Hook. 
Rolsa Valley 
       From there head back south to your starting point, and this time
       head east. Go north around the upper end of the bay and east
       through the first opening in the cliff you reach. Enter the
       doorway just to the north. This should take you to a wall of
       stones alongside a river in the Rolsa Valley. Proceed all the
       way to the right to find the entrance to Eruga's Forest. 
Eruga's Forest 
       Head to the right. When you can't move any farther along the
       forest floor, try throwing the grappling hook up above the
       screen to climb up to the branches above. After a while you'll
       come upon Eruga's lair. 
Eruga 
       You should have at least 6 full units on your life bar, a
       powered-up weapon, and enough Mind points to cast Recover
       before you enter Eruga's lair. Simply walk up to him and start
       pounding away at the B button. Don't even make an effort to
       dodge the projectiles as that will waste precious time. Once he's
       defeated a portal will open and take you to one of the Gods of
       Indora, who will give you the Wind Pulley. You'll be returned
       to Garloz. 
Mt. Primeval 
       Back in Garloz, head to the southernmost peninsula you can
       reach on foot. Cross the rope on the western side of this
       peninsula and go west. You'll come across the portal to Mt.
       Primeval, where flying dragons will attempt to drop eggs on
       you from above. Head all the way to the right to discover
       Sagila's Cave. 
Sagila's Cave 
       Work your way to the right and you'll find your way outside
       again. Further to the right is another entrance to the caves. At
       the ledges set above shafts in the floor you can use your
       grappling hook to climb down. Head down to the lowest levels
       of the caves and you'll find Sagila's web. 
Sagila 
       He's easy to beat at any level. Simply use the grappling hook to
       climb all the way up to the center of the ceiling and attack left or
       right with your weapon to drive him back when he approaches.
       It might take a minute to finish him but if you're careful you
       won't even be injured. Your reward is the Crossbow. 
Lapis 
       Head to the eastern edge of Garloz, past the entrance to Rolsa
       Valley. You'll find the entrance to an area where you'll be
       attacked by more dragons. Past here are the flying islands of
       Lapis. Whenever you can't proceed further, try using the
       grappling hook to climb up or down to find the next island. The
       crossbow will allow you to pass chasms with no rope stretched
       across them. Eventually you'll find your way to Belzar. 
Belzar 
       You'll want at least 8 HP before you face him. Climb up right
       next to him and start pounding away. Simply jump straight up
       over his intermittent shots and keep hitting him. When you beat
       him you'll be given the Coat of Arms. 
Dorago's Palace 
       Once back in Garloz cross the rope near the entrance to Mt.
       Primeval, then head north and west. Stand just below the log
       and use the crossbow to reach the palace. The interior of the
       palace is a mazelike overhead-view area. It will take time but
       you shouldn't have too much trouble finding your way to
       Dorago. 
Dorago 
       Be sure to have a healing potion before you face him. Stand
       below and to the side of him and start jumping and hitting him.
       Try to stay in one place and he should be easily beaten. You'll
       then receive the Armor. 
Tower of Garba 
       Return to Gran Mountain and climb up near the summit, then
       head to the right to find the tower. Inside you'll face a series of
       tough bosses. Your best bet is to use brute force and have
       enough Mind for a Recover spell as well as a healing potion.
       You'll want at least 9 HP before you try this place. The reward
       for beating the dragon at the top is the Pegasus Flute. 
Sky Castle 
       Go back to Rolsa Valley and find the hermit who says you'll
       need the grappling hook. Use the hook to scale the tower he
       resides in. Once you have all the treasures you can can blow the
       flute at the top of this tower to open the entrance to Ligar's
       castle in the sky. Fight your way through its mazelike interior
       to challenge the final boss. 
Ligar 
       You're in for a rough time if you face him with anything less
       than the full 12 HP. You can try to play carefully and dodge his
       bullets, but this can be difficult. Make the task a little easier 
       by playing the Pegasus Flute during the fight; it'll make his 
       bullet-spewing arms disappear for a few moments. If you can get 
       to him with your Mind points and potion intact, then just go 
       crazy and keep hitting him in the head, healing yourself when 
       necessary. He should be dead before your HP runs out. 
       Congratulations! Sit back and enjoy your hard-earned ending. 

----------------
Game Genie Codes
----------------

PPPPPP 
       Enemies run from you - by Jay McGavren 
ZEVLEY 
       Most enemies disappear as they approach you - by Jay McGavren 
PELAGE 
       Enemies are invisible - by unknown author

----
Bugs
----

Scale Cliff in Garloz (From Frank Piringer)
       Follow the map to just before the first hermit, where the evil 
       tree blocks the path. Kill the tree, and go to the top of the 
       path.  Just before turning right, press against the top of the 
       path and jump towards the right (which will scroll the 
       screen).  As the screen scrolls, press up and left.  As soon 
       as the screen stops scrolling right, it should roll back 
       towards the left.  Do this a few times as you fall, and be 
       sure to land on the LEFT screen. You should be a few
       centimeters above the ground! Press up and left, and you can 
       now walk on the top green part of the map! It might look 
       distorted, and will show random parts of the map. If you want 
       to get back down, go back to the first screen where you
       scrolled back and forth, and jump off towards the right.
Kill Eruga Easily (From Frank Piringer)
       Enter his room, and immediately jump on his head. After his 
       first shot, try and direct him towards the right side of the 
       screen, where the invisible door is.  After a few shots, 
       he'll gradually start to get stuck in the wall. If you keep 
       bouncing on his head, and avoiding his shots, eventually 
       he'll begin twitching back and forth quickly, always ending 
       up facing the right. Eventually, you'll be able to jump off, 
       and he won't turn around, leaving his back open to attack.
Kill Belzar Easily (From Frank Piringer)
       As soon as you walk into Belzar's room, use the grappling 
       hook and go down below the screen.  The screen will scroll 
       into an empty sky, and then scroll back up. Belzar will be
       about an inch lower then before, and you can just jump up and 
       hit him. His shots will be much easier to dodge this way.
